23 June 20111. Key strategic decisions included the following:1.1 Reporting on outcomes Cabinet noted progress on implementation of Delivery Agreements. The relevant Ministers will provide more details through media briefings in the coming weeks. An executive summary of the Programme of Action (PoA) achievements and challenges in respect of the reporting cycle April 2011 to June 2011 is attached.1.2 Intervention in the Eastern Cape Education Department Cabinet noted progress on intervention in the Eastern Cape Education Department as part of the Constitutional requirement, Section 100(1) (b). A task team comprising of 5 Ministers (Ministers of Justice &amp; Constitutional Development, Basic Education, Finance, Higher Education &amp; Training, and Public Service &amp; Administration) will continuously interact with each other, to advise on the turnaround plan and ensure that the intervention is implemented successfully. 1.3 Report on the Africa Youth Day Festival Cabinet noted a report on the Africa Youth Day Festival (AYD) and approved that the report be distributed to the National Youth Development Agency, Government departments and other key role-players. The festival strengthened platforms for youth participation in decision-making at local, regional and continental levels. The event affirmed the commitment of African governments to regional integration in youth development. 1.4 Management of Performance Assessment Cabinet approved the implementation of the Management Performance Assessment. In October 2010 Cabinet approved that the Department of Performance Monitoring and Evaluation design and pilot management performance assessments and report back to Cabinet on recommendations for roll out. The translation of management inputs into service delivery outputs through good management practices is important for improving service delivery. The Management Performance Assessment involves assessing the quality of these management practices and each component of performance assessment (individual, management, and programme or policy results) is an important element of the overall performance management system. 1.5 Abalone Fishery Cabinet noted the progress report on the conditional reopening of the Commercial Abalone Fishery as of 1 July 2010. 1.6 17th Conference of the Parties (COP17) preparatory African Energy Minister s Conference Cabinet approved that South Africa hosts the 17th Conference of the Parties (COP17) Preparatory African Energy Minister s Conference from 15-16 September 2011. South Africa is a party to both the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its Kyoto Protocol. The UNFCCC sets an overall framework for intergovernmental efforts to tackle the challenges posed by climate change. Because the country is a signatory to the Protocol, it has to comply to and participate in meetings and discussions. 1.7 12th International Labour Organisation (ILO) Regional Meeting Cabinet approved that the Department of Labour hosts the 12th International Labour Organisation (ILO) African Regional meeting from 10-14 October 2011 at the Sandton Convention Centre in Johannesburg. During the State of the Nation Address, President Zuma indicated that one of the goals of government for the medium term is to ensure that our foreign relations contribute to the creation of an environment conducive to sustainable economic growth and development. To this effect, Government will continue to prioritise the African Continent by strengthening the African Union and its structures and give special focus to the implementation of the New Partnership for Africa s Development. 1.8 2009/10 report on the Research and Development Tax Incentive Programme (Annual report to Parliament) Cabinet approved that the 2009/10 annual report on the Research and Development Tax Incentive programme be submitted to Parliament as part of the legislative requirement. The South African government offers tax incentives to encourage private sector investment in scientific and technological research and development activities in terms of section 11D of the Income Tax Act. The Department of Science and Technology implements this programme in conjunction with the South African Revenue Services (SARS), the Department of Trade and Industry and the National Treasury. 1.9 National Programme for developing a titanium metal powder industry in South Africa through strategic research and development (R&amp;D) As part of an ongoing strategic update, Cabinet noted progress made by the Department of Science and Technology in establishing a titanium metal industry in South Africa and the priority interventions for 2011/12. This programme is geared towards the production of cost-competitive titanium metal in powder form for use in aerospace and other high-tech industrial applications. 1.10 Developing the next generation of researchers and academics through increased output of Masters and Doctoral graduates Cabinet noted the initiatives by the Department of Science and Technology to develop the next generation of researchers in response to the need for the country to produce an increased number of skilled individuals especially in science, engineering and technology. 1.11 Findings of the 2008/9 National Survey of Research and Experimental development (R&amp;D Survey) Cabinet noted the results of the 2008/9 National Survey of Research and Experimental Development. This survey was commissioned by the Department of Science and Technology to monitor the flows of the research and development investment and performance by the different sectors, namely government, science councils, higher education institutions, business sector and the non-profit sector. 2 Current affairs 2.1 President Jacob Zuma is planning to visit five provinces as part of government s ongoing Monitoring and Evaluation effort. The next visit is planned for Limpopo on 7 July 2011. The focus will be on health in keeping with outcome 2 which anticipates which a long and healthy life for all South Africans.2.1 To enhance the overall visibility of government s programme of action, Deputy President, Kgalema Motlanthe will visit Petrusville in the Northern Cape on 24-25 June to assess implementation of programmes under the War on Poverty campaign.2.2 July 2nd marks the 100 days countdown for Census 2011. Cabinet calls on all South Africans to Stand up and be counted . The Census is a key tool which guides planning, policy-making, the allocation of resources and monitoring and evaluation of programmes and policies. 2.3 Cabinet noted that a high-profile media event, to formally launch the Curriculum and Assessment Policy Statements (CAPS), is scheduled for July 2011. The final CAPS were formally handed to the Minister of Basic Education, and the process requires that the Minister now publishes the CAPS in the Government Gazette. This will culminate in CAPS being declared a National Education Policy., thus concluding the curriculum implementation review process initiated by the Minister in 2009. 2.4 Cabinet noted that the Minister of Basic Education, Angie Motshega will release the National Report on the Annual National Assessment (ANA) on 28 June 2011. 2.5 The commemoration of International Day Against Drug Abuse and Illicit Trafficking will take place in Fezile Dabi District Municipality, Free State, on 26 June 2011. This will take place under the leadership of the Department of Social Development and will provide a platform to address the challenge of substance abuse facing youth. 2.6 Cabinet calls on all South Africans to comply with the statutory requirement of the RICA legislation, which is part of the Government's effort to fight crime. The deadline for the registration of cell phone SIM Cards ends on 30 June 2011. 2.7 The 3rd Municipal Water Quality Conference will take place from 27 June until 1 July 2011. Under the theme Reshaping the South African Municipal Water Quality Landscape , the conference provides a platform for government to communicate key interventions and programmes aimed at managing drinking water quality and wastewater services. 2.8 The theme of: Working together to build a caring society for Nelson Mandela International Day, on 18 July, provides government departments with a platform to celebrate and acknowledge the legacy of former President Nelson Mandela in a manner that integrates key programmes impacting on the lives of South Africans. July 18 also marks the 99-day countdown to the 2011 Matric Examinations. Cabinet wishes our learners well in preparing for this important milestone. 2.10 Cabinet calls on all South Africans to unite behind our national sports teams by supporting the magnificent Fridays Campaign. This is in view of the Special Olympics team as they compete in the 2011 Special Olympics World Summer Games taking place in Athens, Greece from 25 June to 4 July 2011. The National netball team, amaNtombazana, will compete in the World Netball Championships in Singapore from 3 to 10 July 2011 and Swim SA will participate in the 14thFINAL World Championships in Shanghai, China from 16 to 31 July 2011. 3 International agenda 3.1 Incoming state visit by President of Tanzania, Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete 19 to 20 July 2011. 3.2 International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Ministerial Conference on Nuclear Safety - 20 to 24 June 2011 in Vienna, Austria. 3.3 The G20 Development Working Group - 29 June to 3 July in Cape Town. 3.4 South Africa continues to strengthen various bi national arrangements in the Continent. In particular, Cabinet noted progress made in the DRC on various fronts of intervention.4 Bills approved for submission to Parliament 4.1 The South African Language Bill, 2011 The promulgation of the use of South African Official Languages Bill, 2011 will respond directly to the obligation imposed by section 6 of the Constitution. The Bill only provides for the regulation and monitoring of the use of official languages by national government. 4.2 The Government Employees Pension Law Amendment Bill, 2011 The Bill seeks to seeks to amend the Government Employees Pension Law, 1996, to provide for the payment of a pension interest to a former spouse of a member of a divorce or the dissolution of a customary marriage; to amend the powers of the Board to make rules and to amend the provisions providing for the recognition of pensionable service of former member of non-statutory forces. 5 Appointments Cabinet approved the following appointments:5.1 Mr Matthew Simmonds, Deputy Director-General: Budget Office in National Treasury. 5.2 Mr Samuel Thuto Masike Shomang, Deputy Director-General: Asset and Liability Management in National Treasury. 5.3 Ms Nombuyiselo Nomvuyo Jeanette Mokoena Deputy Director-General: Corporate Service in the Department of Science and Technology. 5.4 Ms Nomfundo Tshazibana Deputy Director-General: Economic Policy Analysis &amp; Forecasting in National Treasury. 5.5 Mr Miranshan Ramburuth was reappointed Commissioner of the Competition Commission. 5.6 Transnet Board: Ms Yasmin Forbes; Ms Nishi Choubey were appointed Non-Executive Directors of the Transnet Board for a period of three (3) years. 5.3 South African Special Risk Insurance Association Limited (SASRIA): Ms Karen Pepler was appointed Executive Director. Mr Cedrick Masondo was appointed Managing Director SASRIA and as an Executive Director to the Board of Directors.Enquiries: Jimmy Manyi (Cabinet Spokesperson) Cell: 082 379 3454www.gcis.gov.za; www.gov.zaIssued by: Government Communications (GCIS)top