22 September 2011Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town on 21 September 2011.1. Current affairs1.1 Cabinet noted that President Jacob Zuma is in New York attending the 66th United Nation General Assembly. The President will also participate in a number of other key events including an African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council meeting on Libya. These events hosted by the UN Secretary General includes the General Assembly meeting to commemorate the 10th Anniversary of the Durban Declaration on the Programme of Action of the World Conference Against Racism that was held in Durban in 2001 and a UN Security Council Summit on Preventative Diplomacy.President Zuma will strengthen bilateral and economic relations and will receive an honorary degree from the Texas Southern University on Friday, 22 September 2011.1.2 Cabinet also noted that President Zuma will, on 29 September, visit the King Sebata Dalindyebo District Municipality in Mthatha to monitor progress since the area was declared a Presidential Project. This project is prioritised to ensure that the municipality is able to deliver services and address challenges in the area.1.3 Cabinet noted that Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe will visit Limpopo from 7 to 8 October 2011 as part of the Anti-Poverty Campaign. This visit will go a long way to sustain government s voice on the implementation of the Programme of Action.1.4 Cabinet noted that the Presidential Hotline celebrated its second year of operation on 14 September 2011. The hotline s 75% case resolution rate demonstrates that it is effective and that it has been well received and used by South Africans at large. The Presidential Hotline validates the posture of government of being in touch with the people.1.5 Cabinet also noted the marking of Public Service Week which has been underway from Monday, 19 September to Friday, 23 September 2011 under the theme: Transformative Leadership in the Public Administration and Innovation in Governance: Creating a Better Life for All, guided by the slogan My public my future. This period provides the Public Service with time to reflect and renew its commitment to service delivery in line with the Batho Pele principles.1.6 Cabinet commends the South African Police Service (SAPS) for maximising communication through sustained visibility of police crime fighting programmes which aid in uplifting public confidence in government s commitment to ensure that all people in South Africa are and feel safe. 1.7 In the next 30 days matriculants will sit for their final examinations. Cabinet extends its best wishes to them and calls upon South Africans to give our learners their full support. The Minister of Basic Education, Angie Motshekga, will later today give a full briefing on the state of readiness for the examinations.1.8 The countdown to Census 2011 now stands at 18 days to go to the big count which begins on October 10. Stats SA is ready and all the processes are in place. Led by President Jacob Zuma, Cabinet calls on all people in South Africa to embrace this initiative as a necessary tool to gather much-needed data that will enable the effective provision of services, among others. 1.9 The month of October is also being used to profile Transport and Social Development initiatives.1.9.1 Transport Transport Month is being celebrated under the theme: Year of job creation and service delivery in the Transport Sector: Moving South Africa to a Better Tomorrow. This morning, Transport Minister Sibusiso Ndebele launched the 2011 October Transport Month Campaign during the unveiling of the Maritime Skills Study. 1.9.2 Social Development Social Development Month will be launched on 4 October 2011 in Mokgopong, Limpopo Province under the theme: Working together to build caring and sustainable communities .Cabinet calls on all South Africans and media to partner with government in heightening awareness of the scourge of human trafficking during the week 4 to 10 October 2011. Cabinet expressed concern at the apparent increase in suicide deaths of young people and children and calls on all organs of society to pull all stops in assisting our future generation in dealing with their various challenges. 1.10 Cabinet noted South Africa s readiness to host the 62nd International Astronautical Congress on 3 October 201, in Cape Town. The congress is the premier meeting of the international space community and it creates an important platform for South Africa to showcase its institutional and industrial space capabilities to the world.1.11 Cabinet commends young people who have registered for the 72-hour information sharing online JAM of the National Planning Commission from 28 September to 1 October 2011. Cabinet urges participants to seize the opportunity and take ownership of Vision 2030 which will help shape our country s future.1.12 Sport 1.12.1 2011 Rugby World CupCabinet applauds the South African National Rugby Team, The Springboks, for its recent winnings and wishes the team all the best for today s game against Namibia. 1.12.2 All Africa GamesThe 200-strong Team South Africa that represented the country at the 10th All Africa Games (AAG), returned home champions. The Team obtained first position ahead of Continental sport powerhouses. South Africa obtained 62 Gold, 55 Silver and 40 Bronze medals. South Africa participated in 18 of the 20 sporting codes of the All Africa Games, with just over 200 athletes.Of special noting is the prowess of the Banyana Banyana team that had to be divided into two to compete against Ethiopia for a spot at the London 2012 Olympics and a gold medal at the All Africa Games. Today we are proud to announce that our women team will represent the country in London, in 2012.2.1 Conference of Parties (COP17) set to turn the world focus on South Africa: up to 30 000 participants expected.The Department of Environmental Affairs, in collaboration with various provincial governments, has been hosting provincial climate change summits. The purpose of these summits is to educate, inform, engage and raise awareness about climate change to the general public and the three spheres of government.The Summits come as South Africa prepares to host and participate in the 17th Conference of the Parties (COP17) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Durban from 28 November to 9 December 2011.Progress review on the implementation of the White Paper on Population Policy for South Africa and the International Conference on Population Development Programme of Action and a Proposal to create an Inter- Ministerial Committee on the Population Policy. Cabinet noted the progress review on the implementation of the White Paper on Population Policy for South Africa and the International Conference on Population Development (ICPD) Programme of Action, which was adopted by the international community, including South Africa, in 1994. The review report amongst others also indicates that South Africa's population growth rate has slowed down considerably, leading to changes in the country's population-age structure. This introduces new population and development challenges, especially in relation to the young people who constitute the majority of the South African population. The review further highlights the need to scale up services to young people and youth development programmes in relation to the size and needs of the country's rapidly growing male and female youth population.An Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) on the Population Policy was established to ensure the coordination of the implementation of the policy at the highest level. The IMC comprise of the following ministries:2.2 Green Paper on Families Cabinet approved the publication of the Green Paper on Families for public comment.The Green Paper takes the family as a key development imperative and calls for a new vision and approach in terms of social and economic policy with regard to the South African family. It seeks to mainstream and coordinate family issues into Government wide policy-making initiatives by harmonising existing policies in an integrated manner in order to foster the well-being of the family and that of the wider community. 2.3 Integrated Social Crime Prevention Strategy Cabinet approved the Integrated Social Crime Prevention Strategy.Preventing crime remains one of the key priorities of government. The focus of the strategy, as the name denotes is on crime prevention, with particular emphasis on the underlying causes rather than reliance solely on the criminal justice system. The strategy is aimed at breaking the cycle of crime at its most critical point, particularly among young people. 2.4 Disabled People s International 8th World Assembly Cabinet noted that the Disabled People International, in partnership with Disabled People South Africa, will be hosting the 8th World Assembly in Durban from 10-13 October 2011. This is the first time that a World Assembly will be held on the African Continent. The opportunity to host the Disabled People s International World Assembly presents South Africa with an opportunity to play a leading role in promoting the human rights approach and the South African disability model.3 AppointmentsCabinet approved the following appointments:3.1 Land and Agricultural Development Bank (Land Bank)The following Board appointments were made for a period of three years: Ms Mmakeaya Magoro Tryphosa Ramano, Ms Shamila Singh and Ms Susan Ann Lund. Reappointment: Mr Johannes Theodorus Potgieter was re-appointed to the Board for a period of two years.3.2 National Consumer Tribunal (NCT)The following Non-Executive Directors were appointed for a period of five years: Ms Diane Terblanche, Prof Bonke Dumisa, Prof Tanya Woker, Ms Laura Best, Ms Yasmin Carrim, Mr Xolela May, Ms Penelope Beck, Adv Fati Manamela, Prof Joseph Maseko, Mr Fungai Sibanda and Adv Neo Sephoti.Cabinet congratulates the new appointees and wish them well in their new responsibilities.Enquiries: Jimmy Manyi (Cabinet Spokesperson) Contact: 082 379 3454 www.gcis.gov.za; www.gov.zaIssued by Government Communications (GCIS)