22 February 2011Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town on 16 February 2011. As per earlier notification, we apologise for the delay in issuing the post Cabinet briefing which should have taken place last week Thursday. The intention was to allow for an undivided attention to the President s response to questions and comments from the National Assembly. Cabinet noted the status of Acid Mine Drainage in the Witwatersrand and approved the recommendations made by the Team of Experts to the Inter-Ministerial Committee which include amongst others the following:-Cabinet agreed that further work needs to be done to investigate the possibility of an environmental levy for consideration by Cabinet. South Africa was elected as Vice President of the Centre for Science and Technology of the Non-Aligned movement (NAM S&amp;T Centre) for four years (2010 to 2013). The Department of Science and Technology intends to host NAM S&amp;T Centre Governing Council (GC) meeting in 2013. Activities promoted by the centre include sharing knowledge and best practices; building capacity and expertise on a wide range of scientific topics through conferences, workshops, seminars and training courses. These will focus on human capital development that will assist the DST/SA in developing human resources in various scientific fields. Cabinet noted the increasing threat of piracy in South African waters and agreed to explore initiatives aimed at assisting Somalia to counter some of the root causes of piracy. It further supported the implementation of the Eastern and Southern African-Indian Ocean (EAS-IO) strategy to combat piracy along the coast of Somalia and the greater Southern African waters. The Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, Ms. Lindiwe Sisulu will take the lead in developing a strategy to address the threat of piracy in Southern African waters for consideration by Cabinet a strategy that will focus on South Africa s stance in relation to stabilising the political situation in Somalia; the legislative framework dealing with criminals involved in piracy; the positioning and strengthening of South African (SA) naval forces capacity in relation to the continent and other countries and co-opting assistance from neighbouring countries. Cabinet noted the role played by the South African Revenue Service (SARS) as the African Tax Administration Forum (ATAF) interim Secretariat. Cabinet approved the ratification of the ATAF Agreement and endorsed that South Africa hosts the ATAF secretariat with the purpose of building strong and capable tax administration in Africa. Cabinet approved that a review be undertaken by the Department of Sport and Recreation through the Department of Science and Technology to establish how the World Cup delivery model could be harnessed for the advancement of the national development programme. Based on the outcome of the review mentioned above, a Project Management Unit (PMU) in the Presidency or in any other department whose work cuts across all functions of Government will be set up to coordinate the special strategic programmes that Government intends delivering to communities. The departments involved in delivering the programmes should establish dedicated implementation units for the execution of their projects. Cabinet approved that departments who have listed lessons learnt from the hosting of the 2010 FIFA World Cup, utilise such studies to speed up service delivery in their respective sectors. The Department of Sports and Recreation is in the process of developing a Country 2010 FIFA World Cup Report as well as a report on the impact of the World Cup on Social Cohesion. All Members will submit written inputs to the Minister of Sport and Recreation, Mr Fikile Mbalula for integration into the comprehensive public report to be published by the end of March 2011. The Department of Sports and Recreation is engaging the South African Football Association (SAFA) with a view to bringing the FIFA World Cup Champions, Spain, to South Africa to play against an African XI in June 2011. Cabinet endorsed the call for better coordination and adherence to be given to protocols and procedures that contribute towards advancing South Africa s international work during international engagements. Cabinet noted the Science and Technology Ministerial Review Report, on Science, Technology and Innovation (STI). The Minister of Science and Technology, Ms. Naledi Pandor established a Ministerial Committee in July 2010 to provide a better understanding of what is being achieved in and by the National System of Innovation. The review of the STI landscape seeks to strengthen the NSI and enhance the country s innovation capabilities. Phase two of the review will be able to advise on the best and most cost-effective ways in which innovation can be promoted in the country for economic benefit and the good of all citizens. Cabinet noted the internal work in progress by the Minister of Finance, Mr Pravin Gordhan to align the Preferential Procurement Policy Framework Act to the Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Codes of Good Practice. The following Bill was approved - Judicial Matters Amendment Bill, 2011 The primary aim of the Bill is to amend numerous Acts most of which are intended to address practical and technical issues of a non contentious nature. Cabinet approved the Bill for submission to Parliament during the 2011 session. The following appointments were approved: For enquiries, please contact: Jimmy Manyi (Government Spokesperson) Cell: 082 3793 454 Issued by: Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)