15 February 2011Minister of Transport, Sibusiso NdebeleA very good morning to you all, and welcome to this post-State of the Nation (SoNA) media briefing to articulate the delivery programme of the Infrastructure Development Cluster, as outlined by President Jacob Zuma on 10 February 2011.The work of the Infrastructure Development Cluster emanates from Outcome 6: An Efficient, Competitive and Responsive Economic Infrastructure Network. On 29 October 2010, the Infrastructure Development Cluster Ministers signed their Delivery Agreement with President Zuma.Key responses by the infrastructure cluster to SoNAIn his address on 10 February 2011, President Zuma referred to the expansion of digital services, water, electricity and transport infrastructure as essential to drive economic growth and provide jobs for all our people. Through Outcome 6 of the 12 Outcomes of government, we seek to devise corrective measures and interventions to enable government to ensure maximum impact of infrastructure investment in economic growth.In order to address its mandate, the Infrastructure Development Cluster sectors have a responsibility to focus on the following identified key challenges:Last year, we announced an infrastructure budget increase from R784 to R846 billion over the medium-term expenditure period, making it one of the largest expenditure programmes in the history of this country. The accelerated infrastructure programme allowed us to deliver a successful 2010 FIFA World Cup and set our country firmly on the growth path. This expenditure is credited with shielding South Africa from the worst effects of the economic crises that hit the world a few years ago.Several urgent projects in the Infrastructure Cluster are being rolled out in order to place South Africa on a sustained growth path.1. Securing electricity supply for jobs and economic growth2. Securing funding for electricity3. Water services and infrastructure4. Communication infrastructure(a) The 2010 FIFA World Cup equipment that will be redeployed to two host cities (Cape Town and Tshwane). Telkom will also redeploy some of the equipment to exchanges in rural areas and utilise some of the remaining funds to connect the remaining 125 Dinaledi schools. The implementation of the project will roll over into April and May 2011.(b) The Sentech Second Teleport, which was established for the 2010 FIFA World Cup, scope is now treated as a separate project, and we are awaiting the renewed 2nd Teleport proposal with costs and timelines.The remaining funds/savings of the 2010 Sentech project will be utilised for this purpose.The implementation of this will commence before March 2011, but will roll over into April and May 2011.4.1. Digital Terrestrial Television (DTT) 5. Transport infrastructureThe cluster is today reporting to you on three critical interventions in the transport sector. These are Road Maintenance, Rail Modernisation programmes and the Modernisation of our long-distance passenger and freight services.5.1. Road maintenance programme 5.2. Rail modernisation programmeGautrainREA VAYA5.3 Modernisation of our long-distance passenger and freight servicesThere are generally three sources of funding for transport infrastructure:As a country, we have accepted that to sustain investments we need a combination of the three. Our initial estimate for the roads sector alone is R75 billion just to deal with the maintenance backlog, for commuter rail services R93 billion, Shosholoza Meyl requires investment ranging from R260 to 300 billion! These are staggering figures by all standards. Some countries including France, Germany, China, USA, Canada and South Korea are ready to finance our rail expansion. To focus on roads does not mean we stop building new roads and maintaining existing infrastructure.Our ultimate goal is to have an appropriate modal split across modes - commuters moving mainly through rail, appropriate goods on rail and road and using our maritime and aviation transport to move people and goods without stressing one mode through inappropriate cargo or congestion.Over the next six months, starting with the Roads Conference in Durban in March to our International Investors Conference in June, we will be engaging broadly to find financing options for our projects. We must ensure that the projects are funded through an equitable split between private users and funders.More than any other in South Africa, the Gauteng user today faces choices based on cost and the degree of convenience. The varied the choices the easier the decision. This is the desired end state we want to see in the rest of the country. It is today the turn of the people of Gauteng but tomorrow it must be rural South Africa. The people of Musina in Limpopo, Ulundi in KwaZulu-Natal, and Umthatha in the Eastern Cape also deserve these choices. They need water; they need electricity, digital communications and want to be part of our urban and rural access programmes. It is our responsibility to find best financing options for these projects when it is the turn of the others.Thank you.Enquiries: Neo Momodu Cell: 079 462 5081Issued by: Department of Transport