26 May 2011Cabinet held its ordinary meeting in Cape Town on 25 May 2011.1.1 Cabinet commends the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) for the overall management of the elections, the various government departments that played a key role and the voters for coming out in their numbers to exercise their democratic rights. The increase in voter turnout demonstrates a deepening of our democracy and an understanding by South Africans of their role in enhancing our constitutional democracy.1.2 This year marks the 35th Anniversary of the 1976 Soweto Uprising. This is a very important day on our national calendar. With Government having declared 2011 as the year of job creation, the focus for this year's Youth Month commemoration will be on youth empowerment and participation in the country's socio-economic activities/priorities. Youth Month will be launched under the theme "Youth Action for Economic Freedom in our Lifetime". The main event will take place on June 16 at the Orlando Stadium in Gauteng.1.3. Cabinet is alarmed at the steady rise in the killing of police officers by criminal elements of the society. Cabinet has issued a stern warning that any person found guilty of such criminal behavior will be dealt with by the full might of the law. Cabinet also calls on all South Africans to contribute towards building a safer and more secure society by partnering with the police and reporting any criminal activity.1.4 Cabinet endorsed the view that the next leadership of the IMF should come from the emerging countries. Cabinet did not discuss any names of potential candidates.2. Key strategic decisions by Cabinet included the following2.1 The July Cabinet Lekgotla will prioritise the two most urgent matters facing the country i.e. progress made on job creation and substantive issues pertaining to service delivery.2.2 Cabinet noted that progress on the rest of the priorities of Government will be communicated quarterly.2.3 Cabinet considered the request by the South African Sports Federation for the country to bid for the hosting of the 2020 Olympic Games. Cabinet has decided that it is better for the country to consolidate the gains of the 2010 FIFA World Cup for now and rather focus the country's attention to the delivery of basic services to all South Africans.3. International agenda 3.1 There will be a meeting of BASIC (Brazil, South Africa, India and China) countries in Durban from 26-28 May 2011 to discuss the common negotiating position for COP17. This serves as the nodal communication platform in the build up to South Africa hosting the 17th Conference of the Parties (COP17) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in Durban from 29 November 9 December 2011.3.2 South Africa will participate in the 10th African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) Forum from 7-8 June 2011 in Lusaka, Zambia under the theme "Enhanced Trade Through Competitiveness, Value Addition and Deep Regional integration". This annual forum gathers government leaders and private sector stakeholders from Africa and the United States (US) and provides a platform for South Africa to position itself as a country of choice for investment, business and tourism interests.3.3 The XVI (Sixteenth) Ministerial Conference and Commemorative Meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) in Bali, Indonesia, from 23 to 27 May 2011 under the theme "shared vision on the contribution of NAM for the next 50 years" giving credence to Africa Day, celebrated yesterday 25 May 2011, under the theme "accelerating Youth Empowerment for Sustainable Development."4. AppointmentsCabinet approved the following appointments:4.1 Jerry Matthews Matjila, Director-General: Department of International Relations and Cooperation.4.2 Ms Rosey Sekese, Director-General: Department of Communications4.3 Ms Matsietsi Mokholo, Deputy Director-General: Legal and Governance at the Department of Public Enterprises.4.4 Advocate Mabel Nosisi Mabena, Deputy Director-General: Corporate Management, Department for Women, Children and Persons with Disabilities. Cabinet noted Minister Sisulu s report that the President of the Republic, Mr Jacob Zuma, appointed Lieutenant General Solly Zacharia Shoke as the Chief of the South African National Defence Force with effect from 1 June 2011. This appointment is in terms of Section 202(1) of the Constitution, 1996, read with Section 13(1) of the Defence Act, 2002 (Act 42 of 2002). Cabinet noted that Lt. General Shoke replaces General Nhlanhla Ngwenya, the former Chief of the Defence Force who was recently appointed South Africa s Ambassador to the Republic of Angola. Lt. General Shoke has served the country s defence force with distinction in various capacities since the birth of the new South African National Defence Force (SANDF).Cabinet congratulates the new appointees and pledges its full support as they carry out their respective strategic mandates.Minister Fikile Mbalula took ill yesterday during the Cabinet meeting. Cabinet has noted the doctor s report and is pleased about the Minister s recovery.Enquiries: Jimmy Manyi (Cabinet Spokesperson) Cell: 082 379 3454www.gcis.gov.za; www.gov.zaIssued by: Government Communications (GCIS)